Well, happy new year.
I hope you had a good Christmas.
Nicola, the girl's night had a very relaxed Christmas.
It was very calm, very peaceful.
And so we feel really rested at the start of 2026, which is really nice, really nice.
I can't quite get my head around the fact it's 2026 though.
I was watching a little bit of the build up to the fireworks.
on New Year's Day.
We all sat down and we'd kind of watching, who was it, who was singing?
What was his name?
Pauline?
Ronan Keaton, yeah, bit of Ronan Keaton, blast from the past.
And we'd got there, we'd got there, we'd endured that part of the evening.
And just as Big Ben was about to countdown, we needed to input a pinter sky that we couldn't actually remember.
So we missed the whole of New Year fireworks.
So, yeah.
stayed up all that long.
But during the kind of build-up to it, just as a throwaway comment, they said, it's 25 years since the millennium.
We've had the first quarter of this century, and I was like, wow, that's amazing.
Can anybody remember the millennium book that we all panicked about in the build-up to the millennium that we thought all computers, planes were going to drop out of the skies, and it was just going to be, yes, well, that didn't happen, did it, thankfully.
Time flies by, time flies by, and at the start of every year, especially this year, I always feel a sense of optimism.
Just as Lisa said, for me, it's the start of a new chapter.
It's like turning the page of a new book, and excited to read the pages.
In my perspective, I have, for the last three years, this will be my fourth year, I've had a journal that I've journaled in,
maybe once or twice a week on average, just putting down some thoughts and reflections on what's going on in life.
And I bought my new one on a New Year's Eve, and on New Year's Day I opened it up.
And it's that new book, you know, the first page being written in, and all of these empty pages to be filled.
And so I'm optimistic, I'm hopeful.
I like fresh starts.
But I know for some of you here, 2025 was really tough.
You know, it's been a tough year and you look back and it's the start of 26 and maybe you're tired and it's just, you just think, oh man, it doesn't feel that optimistic because 2025 was difficult.
It may be 2025 was really fantastic here.
Lots of really great things happened.
And you're looking at 2026 thinking, oh, we're more of the same.
Or maybe for a lot of us, it might have been just one of those sort of average years, you know, nothing particularly special happened, nothing particularly difficult happened.
But either whatever our story, 2026 is a new chapter.
There is a sense of new start, new optimism.
Yes, of course, 2026 is a sequel to 2025, which was a sequel to 2024.
And just like,
A book series, you open a new book and read the first page.
It also builds on the pages that have come before.
But it is a new start.
It's my page two.
I like to think of it as punctuation.
I am not known for my grammar and punctuation.
If there was marking for grammar and punctuation when I was at school, I would have got even worse grade in English.
But I always think of like a new year, this moment in the year as a punctuation in our life.
That breath that we take, and we think, right, what's actually important?
What actually matters?
What am I going to shoot for this year?
What am I going to prioritize?
It gives us space to stop and reflect.
And in a way, that's what I want us to do this morning.
is to stop and reflect and to think specifically about our faith and our journey with Jesus.
In my last journal entry before the new year, I wrote a very sort of, this was my title, Order Out of the Chaos, was my title of my journal entry.
And I think I was reflecting on, for six years really,
Life has felt a little bit chaotic.
We lived for a pandemic, I can't believe that one nearly six years since it started in March.
And that was chaotic.
Then family stuff with challenges has meant that life for us as a family has felt really quite chaotic.
It's probably a strong word, but it's been really difficult to plan and to think ahead and to
to kind of go, right, what are we gonna do this year?
What are we gonna do this month?
It's been one of those sorts of seasons.
But I felt this year that the Lord was saying there's gonna be order out of the chaos.
And I felt that the Lord said when I was writing it, that that is actually a prophetic word for some of us here today, but also for us as a church, that in the chaos of life, all of the things that have been really difficult and challenging.
that this is gonna be year of order, that God is gonna bring a calmness to our lives.
And that's not to say previous six years has been completely absent of planning and order.
Of course that's not the case.
But rather this year the winds are gonna quieten down and the rains are gonna cease a little.
It's gonna be a calmer season, that's just what I felt as I was journaling for us as a family but actually for us as a church.
and for many people here, individuals.
And I was reminded of Genesis 1.
It says this, in the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth.
Now, the earth was formless and empty, darkness was over the surface of the deep, and the spirit of God was hovering over the waters, and God said, let there be light, and there was light.
You know, I imagine, you know, I watch lots of sci-fi films, and you know, you go onto these barren sort of
lands with no life and it's just sort of chaos and there's storms and there's wind and it's cold and and you just get this real sense of like this chaotic environment.
And at the start of creation that's how I imagine the earth you know it's been created by God but it's formless and it's chaotic and then God just goes let there be light and suddenly there's light and then we know that over the next six periods of time he speaks
creation into being.
He speaks order into the chaos.
So no matter what season we are in, whether that is a season that feels chaotic or where we're hanging on maybe even without... That would have been a good start, knocking things, flying.
Whether we're hanging on with our fingernails.
This is going to be a season, I believe, where there is going to be more calm and order.
See, even in those chaotic times, God speaks.
God speaks.
From formlessness, is that even a word?
And chaos, God speaks light, life and order into creation.
And God speaks light, life and order into our lives too.
He is with us in the difficult seasons.
And when we build our life upon Jesus,
He is always speaking life and order into our life, no matter what season we are in.
I just think that is a word of knowledge for some of you today.
And when we use a word of knowledge, we think of like a prophetic insight that God maybe gives us for certain individuals or maybe a group of people.
And I just felt this was a prophetic word, an insight for people.
Build your life on Jesus.
and he will speak light, life and order in your future.
You know, if you're here and you don't think your light is very full of light, it maybe feels a bit dark.
If you feel like there is an absence of life, it feels really tricky and difficult and your life is a bit chaotic for various reasons.
then really the key to today's talk is this, build your life on Jesus, because he's the one that brings light, life and order to our lives.
Build your life on Jesus, that's really a word for us all at the start of 2024.
So today we're starting a new series, that's just a lot of preamble, ramble, called Rooted.
And at the center of this series is a very simple truth.
Jesus is the only way truth and life.
Nothing else is secure.
Nothing else can satisfy.
And we're gonna base the series or certainly kind of dip into this, into Psalm 1 as we go through the next five weeks.
Let me read it to you.
Blessed is the one.
who does not walk in step with the wicked, or stand in the way that sinners take, or sit in the company of mockers, but whose delight is in the law of the Lord, and who meditates on his law day and night.
That person is like a tree planted by streams of water, which yields its fruit and season, and whose leaf does not wither, whatever they do prospers.
Not so the wicked, they are like chaff, that the wind blows away.
Therefore, the wicked will not stand in the judgment nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous.
For the Lord watches over the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked leads to destruction.
Psalm 1 creates this juxtaposition where we see the outcomes for a wicked life and a righteous life.
And in verse 3, we have this wonderful picture.
That person is like a tree planted by streams of water which yields its fruit in season and whose leaf does not wither whatever they do prosperous.
And when I think of that passage, I think of something like this.
So hopefully there should be a tree that appears on the screen.
Something like that.
A beautiful, vibrant tree planted next to a river that is just feeding it life.
That's what I imagine.
And I imagine like our lives being like that all of the time.
And that's not to say the storms don't come because the storm comes and the snow comes and the winds blow.
But the tree thrives because it's rooted in a wonderful place.
Do you know trees like hickory trees and long leaf pine are exceptional at we stand in the wind?
I don't know that.
The hickories develop in massive tap roots of over 150 feet deep.
And the longleaf pines develop in extensive lateral roots, once it goes sideways, and alongside the deep tap roots.
So the storms come and they're just like, bring it on.
I don't care, my roots are really deep.
And the tree with the deepest roots is thought to be the wild fig tree.
Ficus natalensis.
I'm not looking at Darren Evans because he'll just laugh at me for trying to pronounce it.
The roots go down 120 metres.
Can you imagine that?
120 metres.
To ensure they have a flow of life giving water.
A tree can be next to a river though and still die.
If the roots are unhealthy,
then no matter how much water and nutrients surround the tree, it will die or it will best survive, but without thriving and being fruitful.
Someone tells us that we are like a tree.
The question is, are we rooted in Jesus, the source of life, or have we placed our roots in other things?
Are we embraced in the right of life or the wicked life?
Here's a thought for you to just think about.
A lot of plants, when drought stressed, will go to seed much more quickly.
They might, for a period of time, look like they've grown bigger.
They might even flower more quickly, but it's out of stress.
It is a survival mechanism that enables the plant to pass on seeds to the next year.
And again, I feel this is a picture for some of us.
Some of us here today and maybe some watching online or later in the week.
Life is stressful, but you may be tempted to think that when you look at the surface of your life, things are going well.
You know, maybe you've made some good money this year.
Maybe you've got a promotion.
Maybe you've moved house, maybe, maybe, maybe whatever that might be.
But in every case, if your roots are planted in something other than Jesus, you are actually drought stressed.
Your life is actually drought stressed.
And at some point, you will realize that you're not thriving.
You are at best surviving without Jesus.
The bottom line, this juxtaposition in Psalm 1, in fact, in the whole of scripture describes a simple choice that we all have to make.
We can be rooted in Jesus, in God, or we can follow the path of the wicked.
There is no middle ground.
Come on David, you can do it.
There we go.
There is no middle ground, no compromise in the Scriptures.
There are two paths, two options to choose from.
We can be rooted in Jesus, or we can be rooted in the world.
Only Jesus gives light, life, and order.
I haven't put this in, but I just came to my mind, you know, in some of the, in Revelation, when the letters are written to the seven churches, in one of them, it says that you're lukewarm.
So God kind of spits you out.
You're not one thing or the other.
You know, there is no middle ground.
There is no sort of lukewarmness in faith.
We're either rooted in Jesus or we're not.
So over the next five weeks, we are unapologetically going to look at what it means to be rooted in Jesus.
And probably more so how we stay rooted in Jesus.
We're gonna look at why gathering together is really, really important.
Why it's important to be in a community, in a smaller to have friends and within the church.
We would call that life groups.
We're going to think about why it's really important that we take hold of our God-given purpose, what God has called us to, and to live it out to bring life to others.
And we're going to think about sort of why we're called to live a life of generosity, to imitate Jesus in that.
But to stay up, I want us to begin with the fact that it all starts with Jesus.
None of that other stuff makes sense.
if it doesn't start with Jesus.
And I say it on apologetically, because we've taught these things before, you know, a number of times over the last few years, in fact over the last 19 years, we'll have taught on these themes many times.
And it will be easy to think, well, I've heard it all before, and you probably have, if you've been around life in your church for a while, you'll have heard us speak on these themes, and hopefully it will be different, it's not just gonna be the same talk,
But why do we keep going over these grounds maybe once a year?
Why do we keep talking about these things?
Well, because the Bible speaks about these things, because the only model we have in the New Testament for how we stay rooted in Jesus is these things.
And the world we live in, whether, and I think on the whole subconsciously,
is trying to cause Christians to withdraw their roots from the things that help them plug into Jesus and to put them in other things.
Rather than having the 120 meter tap root, culture is trying to get us to put down shallow roots, to not really commit to anything, to not really be fully involved.
And the problem with that is, I mean,
Remember Storm Arwin?
When the storm came, was it 20,000 trees or something like that in Northumberland alone?
Just got flattened because their roots weren't deep enough to withstand the storm.
So we unashamedably talk about these things unapologetically because we believe that these things are the way we stay rooted in Jesus.
As a pastor, I would love everyone at life in your church
to be like a tree planted by streams of water, which yield its fruit in season, whose leaves does not wither whatever they do prosperous.
That's what I want for everyone.
I want everyone to thrive and find fullness in Jesus.
These pages, somebody stuck them together.
Oh, there we go.
Page seven, run.
Right.
You know, I believe in weekly gathering.
I believe in being part of a church family.
I believe in living out a goal-given purpose and bringing life to others.
I believe in, we're called to be radically generous.
And that these are fundamental choices that we have to make that help us become rooted in Jesus.
Just take this morning, for example.
You know, it's great.
They were all here and obviously it's cold weather and icy roads and stuff like that and people are getting ready for the kids going back to school and all of those things.
But it's great that you're here.
Psalm 1 verse 2 says this, but who's delight is in the law of the Lord and who meditates on his Lord day and night?
You are hearing God's word being taught.
And I hope you meditate on it.
that you delight in it, that it will shape you at the start of 2026, that it will guide your steps.
You're hearing, you're hearing this truth.
You know, I'm sad when people aren't at church.
You know, I am actually not because of some sort of religiosity or that we want every seat full of a person.
That's not the reason.
But the Sunday morning gatherings, worship environments are unique.
in all of the week, in all of life.
Because we experience God's presence in worship, like we did this morning.
We hear the word of God being taught in the presence of the Holy Spirit, as the Holy Spirit just kind of nudges us.
Well, you know that thing that was just that scripture there, that little word that was said there, that's for you.
That's what happened on a Sunday morning.
And then we have the opportunity to receive from God.
We kind of get a chance to pray for each other, to bring our burdens to the Lord and bring our hopes and dreams to God.
And then of course, we get to hang out and eat doughnuts and cake and drink coffee, which is just as much part of it.
Fellowship, community, connection, we were made for community, which helps us to stay rooted in Jesus.
Whether I led a church or not,
I would be at church if I could every Sunday because I think is the most important thing in our whole of our week.
I love going to church.
I love being with my family.
But when people aren't here, they miss out.
They have a whole week where they don't have this experience of God's presence speaking into their lives in this way.
Yes, God speaks and we connect with them in other ways.
but it's unique on a Sunday morning.
And it's not a David thinks, not a life in your church thing, it's a biblical model.
Every day they continue to meet together in the temple courts.
I mean, they did it every day.
We're just saying, let's do it once a week.
My point is this, if we put this series into practice, and that's going to be the invitation is to put it into practice, then we will become more and more rooted in Jesus.
and we will be able to withstand the droughts, the storms, and the seasons of chaos.
If you choose to prioritize being part of church more fully this year, it would be a very good choice because it's Jesus' church.
It was Jesus' idea.
He came up with the church.
He told the apostles to plant more churches.
He calls people to start new communities of faith.
Why?
Because Christians do better when they're in community.
They meet Jesus more in community than they do when they're on their own.
It all starts with Jesus.
What's your life built on?
What is your life built on?
Let me read your Matthew 7.
Everyone then who hears these words of mine and does them will be like a wise man who built his house on the rock.
And the rain fell and the floods came and the winds blew and beat on that house.
But it did not fall because it had been founded on the rock.
And everyone who hears these words of mine and does not do them will be like a foolish man who built his house on the sands.
And the rain fell and the floods came.
And the winds blew and beat against the house.
And it fell.
and great was the fall of it.
Again, in this passage, Jesus creates this juxtaposition, these two opposing choices.
Instead of righteous and wicked, we see the wise and the foolish man.
But the teaching is actually exactly the same.
Psalm 1 says this.
We are to walk in step with God and meditate and delight in His Word.
Matthew 7 says, we are to be hearers and doers of God's Word, and we are to build our life on the rock, which is Jesus.
The outcome of this is a wise and righteous life.
Psalm 1 goes on, which yields its fruit in season.
This is the outcome of it.
which yields its fruit in season whose leaf does not wither whatever they do prosperous.
In Matthew 7, it says this, and the brain fell and the floods came and the winds blew and beat on the house, but it did not fall because it had been founded on the rock.
That's good outcomes in our life.
But what about the foolish or the wicked?
Not so the wicked.
They are like chaff that the wind blows away.
Matthew 7, and everyone who hears the words of mine and does not do them will be like a foolish man who built his house on the sand and the rain fell and the floods came and the winds blew and beat against the house and it fell.
And a great was the fall of it.
We need to be rooted in Jesus.
We need our life to be built on the rock that is Jesus.
We need to be hearers and doers of God's teaching, God's word.
When I was a teenager, a few years ago now, I competed nationally in athletics.
You probably wouldn't believe it to look at me, but that was the case, especially high jump.
And I would train four times a week.
And my coach was the national high jump coach, and he worked as really hard.
I mean, really hard.
The sessions were difficult.
And we would do all sorts of training exercises to train our muscles and our bodies with the task of jumping as high as we possibly could.
And after weeks of training, I didn't actually have to think about what I was doing.
I could just jump high.
My body, my muscle memory was in place.
So muscle motor learning is when the brain encodes complex movements like riding a bike for automatic performance.
We just get on a bike and we ride it.
Even if we haven't ridden one for ages, we kind of just know what to do.
Our muscles, our body remembers.
One Corinthians 924 to 25 says this, do you not know that in a race, all the runners run, but only one gets the prize, running such a way as to get the prize?
Everyone who competes in the games goes into strict training.
They do it to get a crown that will not last, but we do it to get a crown that will last forever.
To be rooted in Jesus, to build our house, our life upon Jesus, the rock, it requires discipline.
It requires training.
We are in a race, metaphorically speaking, we are in a race, and the reward is a crown that will never perish.
So how is your training at the start of 2026?
How are you running?
How deep are your roots in Jesus?
Are you building your life on sand or on the rock?
I'm not just speaking there to, maybe if you're here and you don't know Jesus, he's not a Christian.
I'm speaking to those of us who have a faith.
Are we building our life on the rock or on the sands?
I look back at the last few years and that have felt chaotic and have been hard with great thankfulness.
I'm thankful because my roots were in Jesus, that my life, my family's life was built on Jesus, that he is our rock.
And the winds have blown and the rains have come and the storms have raged.
But we have been steadfast because our roots are in Jesus and our foundation is Jesus.
Okay, back to the start of 2026.
What am I actually saying this morning?
Thanks, Ellis.
Appreciate that.
Yeah, I was thinking that myself.
So to embrace this promise of a new season, a season of order out of chaos, it has required action.
I was really taken by that when I was journaling a couple of days before in the new year.
I was thinking, do you know if I'm gonna, it's not just a kind of God's gonna click his fingers and it's gonna be order.
It's gonna actually take effort on my part.
I'm gonna have to do some stuff to embrace
what Jesus invited me into.
And it's going to require some further training.
That's what struck me.
So I'm reading a book that I forgot is in my car that I haven't read for 20 years.
Some of you may have come across it.
It's called Seven Habits of Highly Effective People.
Anybody read it?
Yeah, a couple of people.
Anyway, it's a good book.
I would recommend it if it's quite a big book.
It's going to take me probably a couple of years to read.
But it's a good book by Stephen Covey.
And Stephen Covey is kind of introduction to the book.
He quotes a guy called Thomas Payne.
And it says this, that which we obtain too easily, we esteem too lightly.
That which we obtain too easily, so if it's a light and easy win, we esteem it too lightly.
It doesn't really have value.
It is deiness only, which gives everything its value.
In other words, if it really, really matters, we'll come back to that one in a sec.
If Jesus really matters to us, if Jesus really is our foundation for our life, if he really is the rock on which we wanna build our life upon, it's not gonna be easy.
Building our life upon it is not easy.
It requires training and effort and choices.
and discipline.
I have a good friend called Steve Nicholson.
And he once really helped me when I was thinking about prophetic words.
And he said, a prophetic word is an invitation, not a promise.
It's an invitation, not a promise.
Just because you've had a prophetic word doesn't mean you're going to receive it unless you actually act upon it.
It's an invitation.
And the promise is in the Scriptures.
are also invitations.
They are saying, Jesus saying, look, this is what I promise, but you also need to act upon these things.
I was thinking about building a life rooted in Jesus, that it's actually not easy.
There are so many distractions, so many things that can take our time.
that can be the grass can look greener in so many different directions.
We have to grasp the limitless of Jesus to realize how much we need to work at our faith in Him if we want to receive the fullness of life.
To receive the promise of fullness of life
To be able to withstand storms, to be able to step into everything Jesus has made us for, it's not easy.
It requires discipline.
It requires training.
It requires our full attention.
It's not a little side project or a little side hustle.
It's a new phrase I've not heard until before.
A side hustle.
Faith is not a side hustle, something we do on the side that kind of
and then life goes on, is the main event.
It's the main event.
If we're going to walk the path of righteousness and the path of the wise, then we need to make Jesus our Lord and not just our Savior.
If He's not our Lord, then we fall into the traps of the foolish and the wicked.
In Matthew 7, it includes three words that at the start of 2026, I think we would do well to heat.
Everyone then who hears these words of mine and does them will be like a wise man who built his house upon the rock.
My initial series, which is now titled Rooted,
was seven habits of highly effective Christians.
Thankfully, it got vetoed by the boss.
And rightly so.
However, whether we call them spiritual disciplines, patterns, practices, habits, rhythms, there are choices we can make at the start of 2026 that will cause our roots to go deeper and our foundations in Jesus to become stronger.
No, we can choose to read the Bible more.
We can choose that.
It is a choice.
We can choose to pray more.
We can choose to be doers of God words, not just hear us.
There are lots of Christians with lots of knowledge.
I don't sometimes think knowledge is our issue as Christians.
our issue is actually doing what we know.
We can choose to be doers of God's word.
We can choose to prioritize being here on Sunday morning, to be in a worship environment, to go to the spiritual petrol station every Sunday and refuel.
We can choose
to do that.
We can choose to be rooted in community, in a life group, to have people who know us and who we know, who pray for us, who love us, who text us, who look out for us.
We can choose to be part of a community like that.
We can choose to live out our God-given purpose, to bring life to others.
We can choose to do that.
We can choose to use our gifts and our skills and all the things that God has poured into us for the benefit of others.
And we can choose
to learn how to be radically generous with our lives and our resources.
We can choose.
And at the start of 2026, we can choose.
We can choose to make these our habits.
Maybe you read the Bible a lot, but you don't pray as much as you could.
Maybe you've never got around to join in a life group.
Maybe Sunday services are not a priority for you.
Maybe you know the Bible, but you're not really living it out.
Maybe you've never really served.
Maybe you're not actually living out your purpose.
Maybe you've never really embraced generosity.
You know, if we
built all of these seven habits into our life.
If we trained ourselves, just like I did at high jump, they become like muscle memory.
No matter what life feels like, no matter what storms we go through, we're not really shaken.
We have anchors, we have rhythms, we have practices that keep us rooted in Jesus.
Our life doesn't fall apart.
We will be fruitful.
Our leaves will not wither.
even in the drought.
So at the start of 2026, this is the invitation of Jesus to put roots even deeper into his life, giving waters.
That's the invitation.
The question for all of us is, are we gonna take hold of this invitation?
Are we gonna actually say, I hear the invitation and I'm gonna accept it?
Are we gonna live out the habits?
And there's more I could go on that bring fullness of life.
I suppose do we want to be this tree?
Is that what we want our life to look like?
That vibrant, beautiful tree that just looks full of life.
A tree planted by streams of water which yields its fruit in season whose leaf does not wither whatever they do prosperous.
Is that what we want for our life?
We can choose that life, but it is an invitation and a promise if we heed the invitation.
But I am aware that maybe some of you are here today and you've never invited Jesus into your life.
You have built your life on the sun because you didn't know there was a rock.
You've put your roots down in worldly and broken things because you didn't actually know there was a source of real life.
Well, the invitation to you today is to invite Jesus into your life and to be replanted into his streams of living water.
So if that's you, I'm just going to pop a little prayer on the TVs and I'm just going to invite you to pray.
So if you've never invited Jesus into your life and you
and would like to be the tree that's full of life.
And maybe feel a little bit more like dead tree than this is for you.
Lord Jesus, I confess my sins.
Just echo this in your hearts.
Lord Jesus, I confess my sins and ask for your forgiveness.
Please come into my heart as my Lord and Savior.
Take control of my life and help me to walk in your footsteps daily by the power of the Holy Spirit.
Thank you, Lord, for saving me and for answering my prayers.
If you've kind of echoed that in your heart, if you prayed that and you mean it, then you've taken your first step to putting roots down into Jesus.
And we'd love to help you join the Alpha Course, brilliant ways to start.
But I want to finish before we go into a time of ministry with a little practical step.
In September,
We launched the Spiritual Growth Plan, or Spiritual Plan Growth, as I did it, when I did have them in the proper dyslexic moment, SPG instead of SGP.
Basically, it's a little survey that you can do.
And then what we'll do is we've got a team of people who are, I don't know what we're calling them, I think the current name is like Spiritual Growth Plan Guides, who are just gonna,
gather with you, talk through kind of what your hopes and dreams are for your faith, and encourage you to take next steps to grow in your faith.
So if you fill that in, Kerry, who's overseeing that, will kind of reach out to you and arrange to kind of partner you up with somebody.
At the start of 2026, we really think that would be a great step.
Just fill it in, get into it, have a conversation, and just begin to put roots down deeper in Jesus.
So I just want to flag that.
Shall we stand?
Let's pray.